In order to build their final project the first thing we need to do is understand a little bit more
about authentication.
Our objectives are to define one way password hashing and to find Jason Webb tokens.
So what is one way hashing one way or hashing is converting data into a fixed length hash string and
you can recreate the hash if you know the original data.
In other words the hashing is one way.
Once you have the hash you can't go back and figure out what the original data was.
And this is very useful for saving passwords on a server because one of the first rules of saving passwords
is that you never ever want to save the actual password if my password on a site were password 1 2 3.
The site should never know that my password was password 1 2 3.
The data that the site saves should just be the hash and nothing else.
So here's an example of hashing the password password the string password will be given to a one way
hash library called decrypts Beecroft will generate a hash that looks something like this.
Now that definitely doesn't look anything like the word password.
But how does that help us with signing and how does that help us with authentication
well.
Once you've saved that password as a hash.
The process of signing in goes something like this.
You have that that hash saved in your database and then a user comes along and wants to sign in.
So they provide you with their password the password again goes through be corrupt.
And again generates the hash.
Now in order to verify that the person is authenticated correctly you have to compare those two hashes.
The one you have saved in the database and the one that the user just generated with their current password.
And if those two hashes match up exactly then that user can log in.
Of course the trouble with passwords is that users don't want to enter passwords on every page.
So there needs to be a more user friendly workaround to prove that you've logged in in the past
to help us prove the logged in in the past.
We use a Jason web token or JWT or often called Jott.
This is the web standard for storing sign data so we can use Giat as proof that you've logged in before
and a job consists of three pieces.
The first part of the Giat the part from here to the period is the letter the next part is the payload.
And finally the signature and the signature is used to make sure that the header in the payload has
not been tampered with.
Both the header the payload and then also a secret key are inputs to generate the signature.
Now the server is the one that keeps track of that secret key and only it can know about the secret.
If a hacker were to get access to that key then the hacker could also make fake dots with whatever header
and payload that they want.
So the thing that keeps this secure is the fact that this signature generation can only be done by the
server.
It can't be done by the client or by anyone else.
So how does the server use this for authentication.
Well the server verifies the payload in the header to make sure it hasn't been tampered with.
And if it hasn't it looks in the payload to see that it has something like a user ID stored.
And if the user id is there that verifies that you've logged in in the past let's inspect jots more
using this Web site JWT Dyo.
So this site gives you a nice interactive way of generating jots and verifying them.
So let's start by making our secret reacts.
So this is the secret that only the server can know about.
And if I changed something about this payload let's say I'll make it user ID and 8 8 8 4 4 4.
So that's my user ID.
And this is the job that gets generated.
Now when the user signs in or give this job back to the client every authenticated request after that
the client needs to send me the job back if I'm the server.
As long as the client sends a jot for which that signature matches the signature that I generate on
the server then you are authenticated.
And once I look in this payload I can see what the user ID has to figure out which user is authenticated
just to test it out.
Let's try changing something about the signature and seeing if it fails.
So as you can see my signature is now different which tells my server hey this token is not valid
if I also change something about the header in the payload.
The signature will then change
since both the header and the payload are inputs to generate the signature.
This will result in the server trying to generate a different signature which will lead to an invalid
signature problem.
So as you can see either changing the signature that I-PASS or changing the header in the payload that
I pass up will result in an error.
You can't change the job only the server has the ability to generate jots.
Lastly it's important to know how the client should send the Giat up to the server.
Well the standard way of doing it is to include the Giat in the authorization header and the first part
of the authorization header seen here is typically bear.
So we don't need to go into why that is but this is the type portion of authorization.
And usually when you're using jati you'd put bear First you put a space and then you put your JWT that
you got back in the server.
So this was our JWT that we just saw with two periods a head or a payload and a signature.
That's it for this one.
Next up we're going to build some of this in no Jap's.